Page 1:
1 
 
The Blood 
• Blood is a fluid connective tissue. It circulate continually around the body, 
allowing constant communication between tissues distant from each other.   
• Blood makes up about 7% of body weight (about 5.6 liters in a 72 Kg man). 
This proportion is less in women, while in children is greater (gradually 
decreasing until the adult level is reached).  
Functions of the Blood 
1. The main function of the blood is to maintain intracellular homeostasis by:   
 
a). 
Carries 
O2 
and 
nutrients 
(glucose, 
amino 
acids, 
lipids, 
and 
 
vitamins)  
to  
the  
cells.  
 
b). Carries CO2 and other wastes (nitrates,  creatine, nucleic  acid) 
away from the cell.   
2. Providing intercellular communication in the body: carries  hormones (secreted 
by endocrine glands) to the target organs.  
3.  
Protection and defense: it allows cells and immunological proteins to 
transport from place to place where need them.   
4.  
Self repair mechanism: clotting cascade. 
 Blood Components 
• Blood is composed from 2 fractions:  
1. Plasma  
 
 
Non living extracellular matrix  
 
 
composes about 55% of total blood volume.  
2.  Formed elements (living cells)  
 
 
composes about 45% of total blood volume.  
• The two frictions of blood can be separated by spinning.   


Page 2:
2 
 
 
 
   Hematocrit 
tube 
with 
blood 
after 
centerfugation 
Plasma forms the supernatant, buffy coat forms the middle layer and the 
red blood cells form the sediment 
 
 


Page 3:
3 
 
 
Plasma 
• the constituents of plasma are:  
1. Water (90-92%)  
2. Plasma proteins: make up about 7% of plasma.  
 
- Albumins (about 60% of total plasma protein) They are responsible for 
maintain normal plasma osmotic pressure. Albumins also act as carrier 
molecules for free fatty acids, some drugs and steroid hormones.  
 
- Globins their main functions are: as antibodies (immunoglobulins), 
transportation of some hormones and mineral salts (e.g. thyroglobulin carries 
the hormone thyroxin and transferrin carries the mineral iron. And inhibition of 
some proteolytic enzymes (e.g. macroglobulin inhibits trypsin activities)     
 
- Clotting factors. These are responsible for coagulation of blood.  
3.  
Inorganic salts (electrolytes) like Ca, Na, Po4 which are responsible for 
muscle contraction, transmission of nerve impulses, --ect.  
4.  
Nutrients: glucose, amino acid, fatty acids and glycerol.  
5. 
Waste products like urea, creatinine and uric acid they are carried in the 
blood to the kidney for excretion.  
6. 
Hormones and gases 


Page 4:
4 
 
Formed Elements 
(Cellular Content of Blood) 
• There are three types of blood cell:  
1. Erythrocytes (Red Blood Cells =RBC).  
2. Platelets (thrombocytes) 
Leukocytes (white blood cells = WBC) they include monocytes, lymphocytes, 
neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils 
Source of Blood Cells 
• Mature blood cells have a relatively short life spine.   
• Blood cells are synthesised mainly in the red bone marrow.  
• Some lymphocytes, additionally are produced in lymphoid tissue.  
• The 
organ 
or 
system 
responsible 
for 
synthesis 
blood 
cells 
are 
called  
hematopoietic system and the process of  blood cell formation is called 
hematopoiesis.  
 
 
 
Hematologic System 
• Erythrocytes = Red Blood Cells  
• Red blood cells are biconcave discs, they have no nucleus and cytoplasmic 
organelles. They contain a red coloured protein called hemoglobin. Their 


Page 5:
5 
 
main function is in gas transport, mainly of O2 but they also carry some 
CO2.    
• Human erythrocytes are 7.5 µm in diameter, 2.6 µm  thick at the rim and 0.8 µm thick in 
the center.  
• The biconcave shape increases their surface area for gas exchange, and the thinness of 
the central portion allows fast entry and exit of gases.  
• The cells are flexible so they can squeeze through narrow capillaries.  
The normal concentration of erythrocytes in blood is approximately 3.9- 5.5 million per 
microliter in women and 4.1-6 million per 
microliter in men 
 
Biconcave shape of RBC 
Life Span and Formation of Red Blood Cells 
• Erythrocytes are produced in red bone marrow (in the ends of long 
bones and in flat and irregular bones).  
• They pass through several stages of development before entering 
the blood.  
• Their life span in circulation is about 120 days.  
• The process of RBC development from stem cells takes about 7 days and is 
called erythropoiesis.  


Page 6:
6 
 
• The immature cells are released into the blood stream as reticulocytes and then 
mature into erythrocytes over 1-2 days within circulation. During this time, 
they lose their nucleus and therefore become incapable of division.  
• The hormone erythropoietin and substances such as iron, folic acid, and vitamin 
B12 are essential for the production of erythrocytes.  
• Erythropoietin hormone is a glycoprotein hormone produced in the kidneys and 
stimulates the production of globin (the protein component of Hb), enhances 
the 
release 
reticulocytes 
in 
the 
circulation 
and 
enhances 
reticulocytes 
maturation to mature RBC.   
 
Erythropoiesis 
 
 
Physiological Factors influencing RBC number 
• RBC count is very high at birth (8-10 million\mm.  
• The count is higher in children than in adults.  
• RBC count is raised at high altitude, in warm temperature, during excitement.  


Page 7:
7 
 
• In women RBC count is relatively low during pregnancy.  
A fall in RBC count is seen low altitude. 
 
Hemoglobin (Hb) 
• Hb is the most important constituent of red blood cells. It is responsible for 
transport of O2 from lungs to tissues and CO2 from tissues to lungs.  
• The normal value in a normal male adult is 13-18 g\100ml and in female is 
11.5- 16.5 g\100ml. 
• Molecules of hemoglobin is large and complex. They are made up of heme 
and globin.  
• Heme is made up of iron (in ferrous form) and porphyrin.  
• Globin is a protein that has 4 polypeptides chains (2 alpha and 2 beta).  
• Each unit of Hb contains 4 units of heme that are united together by the 
alpha and beta chains of globin.  
• Each unit of heme can combine with one molecule of O2. So one molecule 
of Hb can carry 4 molecule of O2.  
• Each RBC carries about 280 million Hb molecules, therefore each RBC has 
ability to carry over a billion O2 molecules.  
• Hb 
with 
O2 
is 
called 
oxyhemoglobin, 
and 
Hb 
without 
O2 
called 
deoxyhemoglobin. 
 
Hb Structure 
 


Page 8:
8 
 
 
 
Types of Normal Hb 
• Fetal hemoglobin Hb F (α2 and γ2): presents in the fetus during the 
last seven months of development in the uterus. and replaced by adult 
Hb within 6 month after birth.   
• Adult hemoglobin Hb (Hb A) consists of : 
       - HbA (α2 β2) 95%  
 
 
-Hb A2 (α2 δ2) 1.5- 3%  
 
 
- Very small amounts of Hb F (α2 γ2)  
Recycling RBC 
• At the end of erythrocytes life spine, their constituents (Hb) are broken dawn 
(to heme and globin) and reused to form new erythrocytes.  
• Iron released from heme is carried by transferrin protein into the blood 
and then to various tissues (bone marrow, liver) 
• Porphyrin released from heme is converted into a yellow pigment called 
bilirubin.  
• Bilirubin is insoluble (unconjugated form). It is taken by liver cells changed 
to soluble form (conjugated form) and excreted into bile.  
• In the large intestine conjugated bilirubin is converted into stercobilinogen  
(by action of bacteria) and then into stercobilin which is responsible for 
brown color of feces  
• Some stercobilinogen is absorbed into blood and excreated into urine which 
called urobilinogen exposure to air converts into urobilin.   


Page 9:
9 
 
 
 
 


Page 10:
10 
 
 
 
 
 
Blood Groups 
• The plasma membrane of erythrocytes are composed of lipids and proteins.  


Page 11:
11 
 
• Several types of proteins are present including A, B proteins (antigens) and Rh 
(D) factor responsible for person’s blood group.  
• Individuals make antibodies to these antigens but not to own type of antigen 
• Persons of blood group A have antigen of type A on their red blood cells. Their 
serum contains antibodies of type B.  
• Persons of blood group B have antigen of B on their red blood cells. Their 
serum contains antibodies of type A.  
• Persons of blood group AB have antigens of both types A and B. they do not 
have type A or type B antibodies.  
• Persons of blood group O have neither A nor B. antibodies of both types A and 
B are present.  
• Rh factor or antigen (Rhesus factor), about 85% of people have this antigen 
own cell membrane of RBC.  
 
 
Leucocytes = White blood cells (WBC) 
• Leucocytes are the largest blood cells.  
• They account for only about 1% of the blood volume.  


Page 12:
12 
 
•  Leucocytes are different from erythrocytes in several ways:  
1. They are true cells, each leucocyte having a nucleus, mitochondria, and other 
organelles.  
2. They do not contain Hb.  
3. Leucocytes can actively move while erythrocytes do not have mobility of 
their own.  
4. Normally erythrocytes do not leave the vascular system but leucocytes can 
leave vessels and enter the surrounding tissue.  
5. Most leucocytes have a relatively short life span.  
 
Types of WBC 
• There are two main types:  
1. Granulocytes 
 
which 
contain 
granules 
in 
their 
cytoplasm 
and 
they                 
Neutrophils, easinophils and basophils.  
2. Agranulocytes  
 
- Monocytes and lymphocytes.   
• There are about 7500 µl (range 5000-10000 µl).  
• Neutrophils 
represent 
60-70% 
of 
total 
WBC. 
And 
about 
20-30% 
lymphocytes. While eosinophils are about 3%, basophils 1% and monocytes 
about 5%.  
 
The 5 types of human leukocytes. Neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils have granules 
that stain specifically with certain dyes and are called granulocytes. Lymphocytes and 
monocytes are agranulocytes; they may show azurophilic granules, which are also 
present in other leukocytes 


Page 13:
13 
 
 
 
Granulocytes  
1. Neutrophil 
Neutrophils (Polymorphonuclear leukocytes 
• Constitute 60-70% of circulating leukocytes.  
• They are 12-15 µm in diameter with nucleus consisting of 2-5 lobes.  
• The cytoplasm of the neutrophil contains 2 main types of granules (specific 
granules and azurophilic granules).  
• Specific 
granules 
are 
small 
granules 
and 
contain 
alkaline 
phosphatase, 
collagenase, lactoferrin, lysozyme and several non enzymatic antibacterial 
proteins.  
• Azurophlic 
granules 
are 
lysosomes 
and 
contain 
acid 
phosphatase, 
α-
monosidase, 
myeloperoxidase, 
lysozyme, 
cationic 
antibacterial 
proteins, 
collagenase, elastase, nucleotidase and others.   
• Neutrophils have short half life 6-7 hours in blood and 1-4 days in the tissues.  
• Neutrophils have phagocytic activity against bacteria and other small particles.  
• During phagocytosis, superoxide (O2-  ) and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2-)are 
formed that kill microorganisms.  
• Myeloperoxidase with O2-  form a powerful killing system.   
•  


Page 14:
14 
 
 
 
 
Neutrophils (Polymorphonuclear leukocytes) 
 
• Constitute 60-70% of circulating leukocytes.  
• They are 12-15 µm in diameter with nucleus consisting of 2-5 lobes.  
• The cytoplasm of the neutrophil contains 2 main types of granules (specific 
granules and azurophilic granules).  
• Specific 
granules 
are 
small 
granules 
and 
contain 
alkaline 
phosphatase, 
collagenase, lactoferrin, lysozyme and several non enzymatic antibacterial 
proteins.  
• Azurophlic 
granules 
are 
lysosomes 
and 
contain 
acid 
phosphatase, 
α-
monosidase, 
myeloperoxidase, 
lysozyme, 
cationic 
antibacterial 
proteins, 
collagenase, elastase, nucleotidase and others.   
• Neutrophils have short half life 6-7 hours in blood and 1-4 days in the tissues.  
• Neutrophils have phagocytic activity against bacteria and other small particles.  
• During 
phagocytosis, 
superoxide 
(O2-) 
and 
hydrogen 
peroxide 
(H2O2-)are 
formed that kill microorganisms.  
• Myeloperoxidase with O2-  form a powerful killing system.   
•  


Page 15:
15 
 
 
 
2.Eosinophil 
 
 
 
 
2-Eosinophils 
• Eosinophils constitute 2-4% of leukocytes in normal blood.  
• Life spine in circulation is about 10 hours and 10 days in tissues.  
• These cells have bilobed nucleus.  
• The cytoplasm of eosinophil contains large granules that are stained by 
eosin.  


Page 16:
16 
 
• The granules contain many types of enzymes e.g. peroxidase, RNAase, 
phospholipase, and others, additionally the granules contain a protein called 
the major basic protein. This protein has ability to kill parasitic worm.  
• An increase in the number of eosinophils in the blood is associated with 
allergic reaction and parasitic infection.  
•  
3. Basophils 
 
• Basophils make up less than 1% of blood leukocytes.  
• There are about 12-15 µm.  
• The nucleus is divided into irregular lobes or S shaped.  
• The cytoplasm contains very large granules that are stained with basic dye.  
• The granules contain mainly histamine and heparin.  
These cells play an important role in the allergy 
 
Agranulocytes  
1. Lymphocyte 


Page 17:
17 
 
 
• Lymphocytes are spherical cells  
• There are small lymphocytes with diameter of 6-8 µm and large lymphocytes 
with diameter up to 18 µm.  
• The nucleus of lymphocyte are large and rounded.  
• The cytoplasm of the small lymphocytes is scanty and in blood smear it appears 
as a thin rim rounded the nucleus. And it is slightly basophilic.  
• Lymphocytes vary in life span; some live only a few days and other survive for 
many years.  
• Lymphocytes are classified according to their function to; B lymphocyte, T 
lymphocyte, and Natural Killer cell.  
• All types of lymphocytes are related to immune reactions in defending against 
invading microorganisms, foreign macromolecules, and cancer cells.  
•  
2. Monocyte 
 
 
 
Monocytes 


Page 18:
18 
 
• These are the largest of the white blood cells.  
• The nucleus is horseshoe- or kidney-shaped.  
• The cytoplasm of monocyte is basophilic and contains very fine 
azurophilic granules (lysosomes).   
• Blood monocytes migrate into the tissues and develop  into 
macrophages.  
• Macrophages 
engulf 
large 
particles 
and 
pathogens 
(large 
cell 
eater).  
• The life span in the circulation is few days but 60-120 days in the 
tissues.  
• They account 4-11%  
• The main function monocyte is phagocytosis but also has ability to 
secret certain substances like interlukins e.g. interlukin 1 (IL-1).  
• Macrophages have important functions in inflammation and immunity. 
           
Leukopoiesis 
 
 
 
Thrombocytes = Platelets 


Page 19:
19 
 
• Blood platelets are non-nucleated disc like cell fragments 2-4 µm in 
diameter.  
 Platelets are not true cells. They originate from fragments of 
megakaryocyte cytoplasm that reside in the red bone marrow.  
• Each platelet has a peripheral light blue stain transparent zone the 
hyalomere 
and 
a 
central 
zone 
containing 
granules 
called 
the 
granulomere.  
• Platelets granules contain calcium ions, ADP, ATP, serotonin, 
pyrophosphate, 
hydrolytic 
enzymes, 
P- 
selectin, 
fibrinogen, 
platelet-derived growth factor, coagulation factor V and XIII and 
other substances.  
• Platelets are very sticky so appear under light microscope as 
clumps of cells.  
• Platelets promote blood clotting and help repair gaps in the walls of 
blood vessels, preventing loss of blood.  
• Normal platelets counts range from 200,000- 400000 per microliter 
of blood.  
 Thrombopoietin 
released 
by 
kidneys 
has 
ability 
to 
stimulate 
platelets synthesis.  
• Platelets have a life span of about 10 days.    
•  
Thrombopoiesis 
 


Page 20:
20 
 
 
 
 
 
Drawing showing the passage of erythrocytes, leukocytes, and platelets across a 
sinusoid capillary in red bone marrow. Because erythrocytes (unlike leukocytes) do not 
have sufficient motility to cross the wall of the sinusoid, they are believed to enter the 
sinusoid by a pressure gradient that exists across its wall. Leukocytes, after the action of 
releasing substances, cross the wall of the sinusoid by their own activity. 
Megakaryocytes form thin processes that cross the wall of the sinusoid and fragment at 
their tips, liberating the platelets. 


Page 21:
21 
 
Haemostasis= Hemostasis 
Steps of Haemostasis 
1. Vascular spasm  
2. Platelets plug formation  
3. Coagulation (blood clotting)  
Fibrynolysis  
 
 
 
 
1. Vascular spasm 
Cause by:  
• Direct injury (vasoconstriction specially in the area where damage took place).   
• Chemical substances (like serotonin produced by platelets that aggregate on damaged 
blood vessel and thromboxanes released by damaged vessel).  
Pain reflex 
 
 
 
 


Page 22:
22 
 
Platelets plug formation 
1. Primary aggregation: discontinuities in the endothelium are followed by platelets 
aggregation to exposed collagen. Thus, a platelet plug is formed at a first step to stop 
bleeding.   
2. Secondary aggregation: platelets in the plug release an adhesive glycoprotein and 
ADP. Both are potent platelet aggregation, increasing the size of the platelets plug.  
 
 
 
 
3. Coagulation (blood clotting) 
• Coagulation of blood is very important for stoppage of bleeding from an injured blood 
vessel. The process of coagulation is complex and involves many steps and many factors 
(most of which is proteins). The factors are identified by roman numerals (I – XIII), and 
also given names as shown in the next slide.  
• These clotting factors activate each other in specific order resulting in the formation of 
prothrombin activator.  
• Prothrombin  activator  is the first step in the final common pathway of blood 
coagulation.   
• In the final common pathway, the prothrombin activator converts prothrombin (present 
in the plasma) to thrombin  (an enzyme).  
• Thrombin acts on the plasma protein fibrinogen and converts it into insoluble fibers of 
fibrin these fibers form a meshwork in which blood get entangled to form a sold clot.  
 
 
 


Page 23:
23 
 
• The final common pathway can be initiated by two processes (pathways):  
 
1. Extrinsic pathway  occurs due to tissue damage.  
2. Intrinsic pathway occurs due to damage to endothelial cells.   
Each pathway consists of a number of steps that are shown in the next slides.  
 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 24:
24 
 
Fibrinolysis 
• After the clot has formed the process of removing it and healing the damaged blood 
vessel begins.  
• Fibrinolysis (breakdown of the clot) is the first step of healing.  
• Plasminogen is converted to the plasmin.  
• Plasmin intiates the breakdown of fibrin to soluble.  
• As the clot is removed the healing process restores the integrity of the blood vessel wall.   
 
 
Control of Coagulation 
• The body control and limit the coagulation cascade; otherwise once started 
the clotting process would spread throughout the circulatory  system. The 
main controls are:  
1. The perfect smoothness of normal endothelial cells of the blood vessel 
(means that platelets do not adhere to it.  
2. The presence of natural anticoagulants, e.g. heparin in the blood which 
inactivate clotting factors.  
 


